[KOGITO-7481] - [KWS-Guides] Document the Enhanced Service Discovery (#177)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/cloud/kubernetes-service-discovery.adoc

----
kubernetes:<group>/<version>/<kind>/<namespace>/<name>?<attributeName>=<attributeValue>
\________/ \_____/ \_______/ \____/ \_________/ \____/ \______________________________/
  scheme    group   version   kind   namespace   name   additional resource attributes
            \____________________/                       \__________________________/
                Kubernetes GVK                            Supported value: port_name
----

The following scheme values are supported:

* **kubernetes**
* **openshift**
* **knative**

For the GVK, the following Kubernetes Resources are currently supported:

* **v1/service**
* **serving.knative.dev/v1/service**
* **v1/pod**
* **apps/v1/deployment**
* **apps.openshift.io/v1/deploymentconfig**
* **apps/v1/statefulset**
* **route.openshift.io/v1/route**
* **networking.k8s.io/v1/ingress**

[IMPORTANT]
====
The **GVK** (Group, Version and Kind) and the **Name** values are **mandatory** and can't be empty, otherwise, the engine will throw a validation issue and the discovery will not be performed.  +
The **namespace** is **optional**. In case of an empty value, the current namespace or context will be used.
====

== Configuration

> You can configure the Service Discovery with two **build time** properties, which are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the Kubernetes Service Discovery with two **build time** properties, which are:
```

* `quarkus.kogito.sw.discovery.enabled`: Enable the service discovery. Defaults to _true_.

> * `quarkus.kogito.kubernetes-client.okhttp.static.logger`: Weather or not to print the `http` communication between the client and the Kubernetes API. Defaults to _false_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `quarkus.kogito.kubernetes-client.okhttp.static.logger`: Wether or not to print the `http` communication between the client and the Kubernetes API. Defaults to _false_.
```

== How does it work?

> During application startup, the service discovery is performed at the Quarkus _STATIC_INIT_ time. First, it scans +
> the Quarkus configuration values and searches for the Kubernetes URI pattern. Then if at least one is found, the engine +
> will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given system property.
> 
> Suppose we have an application that will consume a resource running on Kubernetes, this resource is a Knative Service +
> that exposes a function that can be discovered with the following URI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During application startup, the service discovery is performed at the Quarkus _STATIC_INIT_ time. +
First, it scans the Quarkus configuration values and searches for the Kubernetes URI pattern. +
Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Suppose we have an application that will consume a resource running on Kubernetes, this resource is a Knative Service that exposes a function that can be discovered with the following URI:
```

[source,shell]
----
org.kie.kogito.sw.knative.service=knative:v1/Service/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus/greeting-quarkus-cli
----

[NOTE]
====

> Note that, the application property does not matter. The Service Discovery only cares about the application property value.

Reviewer: Honestly, I don't get that sentence. The application property does not matter but the Service Discovery only cares about it ?

Author: indeed, needs rephrase.
the application property name does not matter, only its value.

====

> Once the application has started, you should be able to see in the logs the Service Discovery into action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the application has started, you should be able to see in the logs the Kubernetes Service Discovery into action:
```

[source,shell]
----
$ java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
__  ____  __  _____   ___  __ ____  ______
 --/ __ \/ / / / _ | / _ \/ //_/ / / / __/
 -/ /_/ / /_/ / __ |/ , _/ ,< / /_/ /\ \
--\___\_\____/_/ |_/_/|_/_/|_|\____/___/
2022-08-23 12:21:04,360 DEBUG [org.kie.kog.add.qua.k8s.SWDiscoveryConfigSourceInterceptor] (main) Configuring k8s client...
2022-08-23 12:21:05,245 INFO  [io.qua.sma.ope.run.OpenApiRecorder] (main) Default CORS properties will be used, please use 'quarkus.http.cors' properties instead
2022-08-23 12:21:05,420 DEBUG [org.kie.kog.add.qua.k8s.SWDiscoveryConfigSourceInterceptor] (main) SUCCESS SWUrl parsed: knative:v1/Service/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus/greeting-quarkus-cli
2022-08-23 12:21:06,043 INFO  [org.kie.kog.add.qua.k8s.SwKubeResource] (main) Connected to kubernetes cluster v1.23.4, current namespace is serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus ---- Resource name is greeting-quarkus-cli
2022-08-23 12:21:06,045 INFO  [org.kie.kog.add.qua.k8s.KnativeResourceDiscovery] (main) Trying to adapt kubernetes client to knative

> 2022-08-23 12:21:06,316 INFO  [org.kie.kog.add.qua.k8s.KnativeResourceDiscovery] (main) Found Knative endpoint at http://greeting-quarkus-cli.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.99.154.147.sslip.io

Reviewer: shouldn't that be also a DEBUG info ?

Author: yes, both needs, update here and at the code.

2022-08-23 12:21:06,375 INFO  [org.kie.kog.sw.AppLifecycle] (main) The application is starting
2022-08-23 12:21:06,382 INFO  [org.kie.kog.add.qua.mes.com.QuarkusKogitoExtensionInitializer] (main) Registered Kogito CloudEvent extension
2022-08-23 12:21:06,460 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) sw-service-discovery 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 2.360s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
2022-08-23 12:21:06,462 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Profile prod activated.
2022-08-23 12:21:06,462 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cache, cdi, hibernate-validator, jackson-jq, kogito-addon-kubernetes-extension, kogito-addon-messaging-extension, kogito-processes, kogito-serverless-workflow, kubernetes, kubernetes-client, openshift-client, qute, reactive-routes, rest-client, rest-client-jackson, resteasy, resteasy-jackson, smallrye-context-propagation, smallrye-openapi, smallrye-reactive-messaging, smallrye-reactive-messaging-http, vertx]
----

[NOTE]
====

> Note that the URI was translated to `http://greeting-quarkus-cli.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.99.154.147.sslip.io` +
> when the application started, and will be used at runtime any time it needs it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the URI was translated to `http://greeting-quarkus-cli.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.99.154.147.sslip.io` when the application started, and will be used at runtime any time it needs it.
```

====

== Discovery Precedence

Depending on the resource to be discovered, there are some paths to follow, please see the following image for more details:

image::cloud/sw-discovery-flow.jpg[]

== Startup time: discovery enabled x disabled

As the Service Discovery scans the Quarkus Configurations during the startup, it can cause a small delay as shown below:

[tabs]
====
Service Discovery Enabled::
+
[source,shell]
----
(main) sw-service-discovery 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 2.360s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
----
Service Discovery Disabled::
+
[source,shell]
----
(main) sw-service-discovery 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 1.507s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
----
====

[IMPORTANT]
====

> When using this feature, you need to balance if the delayed startup time is something
> that your application can afford.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using this feature, you need to balance whether the delayed startup time is something
that your application can afford.
```

= Kubernetes Service Discovery for Serverless Workflow Application Configuration
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Explain what is and how the service discovery works
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, service-discovery, enhanced-service-discovery
// links
:quarkus_issue_url: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/27457

The Kubernetes Service Discovery allows you to have a static URI that defines a Kubernetes resource that will be used
to perform HTTP requests. The resource defined in the URI will then be queried in the current Kubernetes cluster and

> translated to a valid URL. The service discovery feature works during the Application startup, it scans all Quarkus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
translated to a valid URL. The service discovery feature works during the Application startup: it scans all Quarkus
```

Reviewer: I just changed the comma to `:` as it makes more sense to the structure of the sentence IMO

Author: I am not sure about it, can't see why to use ":" in there.

Reviewer 2: I think we can wait for @hmanwani-rh's review.

configuration in search of the following URI pattern. Thus, you should keep in mind that, if the startup time matters to you, then you should consider to use a static URL instead.
The following sketch demonstrates how this URI is composed:

[source,shell]
----
kubernetes:<group>/<version>/<kind>/<namespace>/<name>?<attributeName>=<attributeValue>
\________/ \_____/ \_______/ \____/ \_________/ \____/ \______________________________/
  scheme    group   version   kind   namespace   name   additional resource attributes
            \____________________/                       \__________________________/

>                      GVK                                   Supported values:

Reviewer: `GVK` => you removed the `Kubernetes` before ?

Author: I didn't

                                                            - port-name={PORT_NUMBER}
                                                            - labels=label-name=label-value;other-label=other-value
----

The following scheme values are supported:

* **kubernetes**
* **openshift**
* **knative**

For the Kubernetes GVK, the following resources are currently supported:

* **v1/service**
* **serving.knative.dev/v1/service**
* **v1/pod**
* **apps/v1/deployment**
* **apps.openshift.io/v1/deploymentconfig**
* **apps/v1/statefulset**
* **route.openshift.io/v1/route**
* **networking.k8s.io/v1/ingress**

[IMPORTANT]
====
The **Kubernetes GVK** (Group, Version and Kind) and the **Name** values are **mandatory** and can't be empty, otherwise, the engine will throw a validation issue and the discovery will not be performed.  +
The **Namespace** is **optional**. In case of an empty value, the current namespace or context will be used.

> For **OpenShift** specific resources, **Deployment Config** or **Routes**, you will be required to add the following dependency in your Application's classpath:
> 
> [source,xml,subs="attributes+"]
> ----
> <dependency>
>   <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
>   <artifactId>quarkus-openshift-client</artifactId>
> </dependency>
> ----
> 
> It can be added with link:{quarkus_cli_url}[Quarkus CLI]:
> [source,shell]
> ----
> quarkus extension add quarkus-openshift-client
> ----
> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====

[NOTE]
====
For **OpenShift** specific resources, **Deployment Config** or **Routes**, you will be required to add the following dependency in your Application's classpath:

[source,xml,subs="attributes+"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-openshift-client</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

It can be added with link:{quarkus_cli_url}[Quarkus CLI]:
[source,shell]
----
quarkus extension add quarkus-openshift-client
----
====
```

Author: it was removed.

=== Additional Query Parameters

> Also known as Query String, are defined in the very same way that we are already used to do with URLs to assign value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also known as Query String, they are defined in the very same way that we are already used to do with URLs to assign value
```

to specific attributes.

> There are available two query parameters to help the engine to be more precise when querying for the given Kubernetes Resource,
> which are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two query parameters are available to help the engine to be more precise when querying for the given Kubernetes Resource:
```

> * Custom Labels: Can be used to filter services in case there are more than one Service with the same `Label Selector`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Custom Labels**: Useful to filter services in case there are more than one Service with the same `Label Selector`
```

----
*** With the URI above we will instruct that, if there are more than 1 service exposing the given pod, the label
`label-name=test-label` will be used to filter the service. If the label does not exist, the first found service will be used.

* Custom port name: Useful for determine which port to use when there are many ports configured in the target Service or Container.
It can be configured using the following patter:
** `port-name=<PORT_NAME>`: the port name to be queried.

== Configuration

There are no specific configuration for the Discovery to work properly except by using the expected URI pattern.
However, the okhttp communication interceptor, which logs the communication between the application and the Kubernetes API +
is disabled by default, if there is a need to debug it, it can be enabled back just by setting this application property:

[source,shell]
----
quarkus.log.category."okhttp3.OkHttpClient".level=INFO
----

== How does it work?

During application startup, the service discovery is performed at the Quarkus _STATIC_INIT_ time. +
First, it scans the Quarkus configuration values and searches for the Kubernetes URI pattern. +

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Author: it the KubeURI is not found the application flow will continue as usual.

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Reviewer: ok. I think we should add a `fail-fast` possibility in the future ? because if the application cannot retrieve the URI, then it may not be able to work properly after a start, as this feature is only done at startup. wdyt ?

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Author: if the KubeURI is not found, we do expect user to use the dynamic http url for the service.
In the other hand, we could add the fail-fast  feature if user sets the KubeURI and for any reason it fails to be discovered, parsed, etc.
@fjtirado and I have discussed about it and we thought better just log the error and don't stop the app startup.

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Reviewer: oki then I will create an enhancement with a fail-fast option

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Author: to fail fast it, we just need to return null in the Exception catch in the properties interceptor. We can make it configurable though.

> Then if at least one is found, the engine will parse the URI, query the Kubernetes API for the given resource, and override the given property.

Reviewer: @spolti Created https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KOGITO-7915 and assigned it to you
